AFK Arena - Hail to the New King of RPGs
Michail Katkoff Jun 10
(https://www.deconstructoroffun.com/blog/2019/6/6/afk-arena-puts-lilith-into-the-billionaire-club)

AFK Arena has strong class merchandising, gacha-set design and progression systems. It has a faster progression curve to the late game retention features, but gameplay still lasts longer.

AFK Arena is a turn-based RPG, but it is commonly marketed as an idle game. Although it contains minor idle elements, this game's business model and retention curve is built around turn-based RPG elements.

The entire game is focused on the core loop: using your squad to battle and earn rewards, which are used to level up your squad. What AFK has done differently is automating the battle.

Due to auto-battle, the strategy is completely focused on who you’re bringing into the battle with you. This low-attention, passive style is very suitable for the mobile platform.

AFK Arena explicitly incentivizes having multiple teams with all members being from the same faction. This is far more heavy handed than most western turn-based-RPGs.

The game mechanics all reinforce the core loop, and put pressure on the player to have a strong but wide collection of heroes. 

The 3 'progression milestone' campaign modes advance fast and can't be replayed. When these modes start getting too difficult, players switch focus to other modes.

Features are not unlocked by player level or other progression, only by campaign progress. This ensures that players have the strength required for the new feature.

The 'appointment mechanic' idle mode constantly generates rewards for the player to return and collect regularly.

The 'collection pressure' labyrinth mode tasks players to advance as far as they can, and refreshes every 48 hours. It provides exclusive rewards the further you go.

The 'PvP' arena mode provides a leaderboard for players to compete with others and climb up the ranks before the seasonal reset for rewards.

The 'back bench utility' bounty mode allows players to send their unused heroes on bounties. Bounties take time and can run concurrently, so this encourages players to collect more heroes and come back to initiate new bounties when the previous ones are completed.

AFK Arena simply took the best bits of turn-based RPGs, placed them closer to the start of the game, and removed some of the pain points of the genre like grinding.

One issue with AFK Arena's economy: it has too many different sources that provide too many different currencies that often do the same thing.

At the start of the game, the game acknowledges your every action with incrementing rewards. This makes mastery and constant progression feel highly addictive. By the time these rewards dry up due to increased difficulty, the players are already hooked to the game.

AFK Arena makes some interesting decisions on managing its gacha economy. It has a focus on long-term retention over short-term monetization.

"Breadth" is traded for "depth". It is easy for players to collect all heroes in the common and rare pool. The main longevity lies in acquiring the hero several times over to fuse and form stronger heroes. This has varying effects on players with different motivations. It also reduces the effect of random chance on player progression.

The downside is that the gacha feels not like something you want to deliberate invest in. It rarely gains player the huge increase in power that they desire.

Players join guilds in AFK Arena to access the Guild Store as well as participating in more activities for rewards. By completing quests, the Guild gains points to initiate exclusive events. This constant loop pushes the player and their guildmates to actively play the game. The point contribution leaderboard ensures that your guild is filled with highly active players.

Guild Wars automatically scale all heroes and gear to a high level, providing inclusivity; the main monetization feature comes from selling Battle Tickets to attempt more battles in the war.

The friend list is yet another feature that drives engagement with other active players for gacha rewards and hero buffs.

In AFK Arena, spending only provides minor improvement to heroes. The only way to level up the heroes in the game is by playing the game. Instead, monetization seems to focus more on subscription-based reward passes and VIP bonuses conferred by spending.